---
layout: post
title: The Area Enclosed by Hamiltonian Cycles on Highly Regular Planar Graphs
---

This post was inspired by some doodles I drew on a notepad during some
meetings at work. I vividly remember watching [the youtube
video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=38rf9FLhl-8) which introduced me to the
mathematics of juggling and listening to the lecturer spend several minutes
justifying why juggling ought to have a mathematics. I often think back to this
when observing phenomena in my day to day life. I think it is valuable to look
at simple patterns around us and consider them from a mathematical perspective -
even if we skimp on the formality and rigor.

The Doodles
===========

During a meeting, I doodled some square-ish grids of dots on my notepad. I then
started connecting these dots with vertical and horizontal lines. As I kept
connecting, I ended with a Hamiltonian cycle over the dots. For those who
haven't taken any graph theory, a [Hamiltonian
cycle](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hamiltonian_path) is a cycle (a path which
starts and ends in the same place) which visits every vertex in a graph exactly
once.

The cycle I'd drawn was quite irregular so I redrew the same grid of dots and
tried to find a more symmetric way to connect them. Here are a three examples of
such cycles on a six by six grid of dots.

<img src="/images/hampath/6x6.png" style="max-height: 400px">

An Unexpected Pattern
=====================

As I looked at these grids, I noticed something surprising - they all enclosed
the same number of cells. If we take the edge length to 1 then each one encloses
17 squares of area.

I started experimenting with larger grids found that for a given set of
vertices, the area enclosed by a Hamiltonian cycle never seemed to depend on my
choice of cycle.

"Proof"
=======

I mentioned this to a coworker who suggested a useful paradigm shift. Instead of
thinking about the dots in isolation, think about them as the centers of squares
whose side length matches the edge length in our grid. Now, at each vertex, the
angle of the line going through it determines how much of its square is enclosed
by the cycle. For convenience, of notation I'm going to assume that the cycle
starts in the bottom left corner of the graph and goes up. If you prefer to go
the other way, just swap some negative signs and the math is all the same.

<img src="/images/hampath/6x6_overlay.png" style="max-height: 400px">

When the line is straight (0째), half the cell containing that dot is enclosed by
the cycle. When the line through a vertex turns to to the right (90째), one
quarter of the cell is enclosed by the cycle. Finally, when the line through a
vertex turns left, (-90째), three quarters of the cell is enclosed by the cycle.

More concretely, we can express the area enclosed by a vertex of angle 
$$ \theta $$ 

$$ \frac{1}{2} + \frac{1}{4} \frac{\theta}{90} $$

This means we can compute the area enclosed by the cycle as

$$ \sum_{\text{vertices}} (\frac{1}{2} + \frac{1}{4} \frac{\theta}{90}) $$

We can do a little rearrangement to express this sum as

$$ \sum_{\text{vertices}} \frac{1}{2} + \frac{1}{360} \sum_{\text{vertices}} \theta $$

This is where we get to bring in a fun fact. In a closed loop which does not
cross itself, the sum of the angles is 360째.  This means that everything in the
above expression is a constant which means the area enclosed by the curve is a
constant.

Extensions
==========

This "proof" applies equally well to a hex grid. I suspct that there are other
families of graphs which can tile a two dimensional Cartesian plan and have the
property that all Hamiltonial cycles have the same enclosed area. I have a
hypothesis that the condition required on the original graph is "the graph is
planar and all cells in the original graph are the same". I use cells here to
mean cycles which cannot be subdivided into unions of smaller cycles. My
hypothesis covers intuitive variants like a rectangular grid.

I am curious to see how it will apply to graphs like the one below. I haven't
looked into this graph enough yet to say if it even has a Hamiltonian cycle but
I think it might be a fun place to take this idea next.

<img src="/images/hampath/pentagons.png" style="max-height: 400px">

How Much is Enclosed
====================

In the case of a square grid which is n verticies wide and m verticies high, the
cycle which encloses the maximum area is the perimiter with $$ (n-1) * (m - 1)
$$. The Hamiltonian cycle on such grids falls short of this maximum by half the
number of non-perimeter vertices. This value is always an integer since a square
grid where both dimensions are odd has no Hamiltonian cycle.

In the case of a regular hexagonal grid, the the Hamiltonian Cycle falls short
of the perimeter by as many triangular cells as there are non-perimeter
vertices.

I am curious about the number of missing cells in other families of graphs.
